---
Created: 2021-04-15T13:53
---
Do not wait until your junior year to join clubs and start playing a sport. Longevity and commitment is important.

It actually depends on each type of University:

1. The Ivy leagues-These are the hardest for extracurricular activities and they’re looking for national or world class titles, National chess championships or gold at the Intel or Siemens competitions or science bowl winners or someone who’s done research at a major university or someone who started there own nationally known charity. They are looking for game changers and world leaders. It’s a significant factor in admission and separates you from the run of the mill National Merit Finalist , student body presidents and Boring valedictorian. These are a dime a dozen they want something that unique who stands out.
2. MIT, CalTech- Same thing but in a science related field and even more intensive. They need to make sure you’re brilliant and could handle the extreme difficulty of their educational system.
3. Other top 20 schools such as Duke, Washington St. Louis Notre Dame- They are looking for items in number one but it doesn’t have to be on a national level; for example, you can be state chess champion (or semifinalist) or state academic champion or all county in football and a top hundred recruit. That should get you in at Notre Dame anyways. I have found over the years of working with some kids I mentor that these other top 20 schools have a different focus than the ivys and look for kids with a higher GPA and incredible activities but not Ivy League type. They love to feast on the kids who apply to the Ivy’s, but don’t get in because of it and they end up with some incredible well rounded kids who have it all just not those national level activities. We know a family member who got into Northwestern with a 4.5 GPA, a 1560 sat and who played in a band at some famous clubs and was heavily involved at his school with leadership and clubs (just not at an ivy level caliber). He didn’t apply to the ivys and likely would not have been a perfect candidate for the ivys (sure he may have gotten a look for his music) but he was actually perfect for Northwestern. Each school wants and attracts a slightly different set of students, although there is some overlap where a kid will apply to both the ivys and these other top 10–20 schools and get into most… Northwestern, usually would not turn away a brilliant, all around kid with a 4.4 GPA, 1570 sat who is the national chess champ because they know that possibly the kids first choice, even if he does apply and get into Harvard, might be Northwestern so they will likely offer him/her too and thus their will be overlap.
4. Schools like Georgetown and NYU and Cornell are looking for leadership and extreme involvement/accomplishments at your high school of three academic rigor and involvement of students who will take advantage of everything with school has to offer. Anything where you demonstrate passion for being involved at your school and your community at a very high level (president of your church youth group; tour guide on campus; started a charity or three clubs; president of speech and debate (you can’t debate that one). For example, my son was able to get into NYU with being the captain of the academic decathlon team ranked nationally and due to winning several medals at state championships. Cornell is looking for incredible involvement on campus and leadership and Georgetown is looking for just a extremely well rounded person whose going take advantage of everything the school has to offer. The schools like these want the kids who are running the campus that work with all of the faculty and Principal daily (the go to kid whom admin loves, the doers on campus) and the same kids who get all of the student leadership awards at awards night. You know the type-the kid helping out at every school event and running the show.
5. Cal State schools –I’m not kidding you but they only care about GPA and SAT and you’re not even allowed to list any activities in the application. Grades are a California “borne and raised” tradition and not just for the public schools either.. the famed group of colleges like Pomona, Claremont Scripts start with grades although these need top sat scores and regional level extracurriculars too but they won’t usually admit you starting without close to all As. Pepperdine is similar as well as is LMU (two great schools that many forget that the kids absolutely love here in California).
6. Schools like U Alabama and U Arizona or Arizona State, LSU etc. usually want involvement outside of your schoolwork- are you active and did you volunteer or join a few clubs. Grades and Sat are the key decisions here and show your active involved and doing something with your life besides having a library named after you. High Grades and sat scores will also score you a guaranteed scholarship if you google as an example “Scholarships at U Alabama. “So you really know in advance if you’ll get in and how much you'll get in scholarships here by applying taking the guess work out of admissions for almost every candidate
7. good luck and remember grades are front and center or paramount as a general rule in college admissions; sat scores are second and third is activities, but for the ivys who want one and two but need 3 as a key differentiator…. I have also seen kids getting into almost all of the top UC schools with just one activity and nothing else, having all As and 1500 sat scores so there is a place for everyone if you know what each school generally looks for. The admitted student profile also give you glimpse of where you usually need to be for consideration, just not for activities.